File and Directory Permissions

MacOS, being based on a Unix predecessor, makes file and folder permissions easy for us to grasp and manage. Before we dive into viewing and governing permissions in macOS, we will refresh our knowledge of the Unix/Linux permissions and how they are applied.
*NIX Permissions Primer

Within the file system structure, every object on the host belongs to a specific user or group. When we create new files or directories, they belong to the user who initiated their creation (User Owner), and our primary group will also be the group owner of the file. If a directory has specific permissions set for group ownership, those permissions will apply to the files created within.

These permissions are shown utilizing the octal or Base 8 numbering system. They are used to apply the read, write, and execute attributes to the contexts of User owner, Group owner, and Others on a file. These are represented as:
Attribute 	Octal Value
(r) - Read 	Octal value of 4
(w) - Write 	Octal value of 2
(x) - Execute 	Octal value of 1

Tip: Converting between permission attributes and their octal value may be difficult to do in our heads, so there are tools like chmod-calculator that can help us do the conversion quickly.
Basic File Permissions
File and Directory Permissions

kappajester83@htb[/htb]$ ls -l  

- rw- r-- r--@  1 htb-user staff 2512910 Aug 30  2019 HTB-Wallpaper-1.png
- |_| |_| |_|   |    |       |     |      |_______|
|  |   |   |    |    |       |     |          |__ Date
|  |   |   |    |    |       |     |_____________ File Size
|  |   |   |    |    |       |___________________ Group
|  |   |   |    |    |___________________________ User
|  |   |   |    |________________________________ Number of hard links
|  |   |   |___ Permissions of others (everyone else)(read)
|  |   |_______ Permissions of the group (staff)(read)
|  |___________ Permissions of the User owner (htb-user)(read, write)
|______________ File type (- = File, d = Directory, l = Link, ... )

From the output above, we can see the terminal output for the file HTB-Wallpaper-1.png. This breakdown shows us how our permissions are implemented and other attributes, such as the date of creation/modification, the number of links associated with the file, size, and the object type.

From this output, we can see that the User owner is the user htb-user and the group owner is staff. This is likely due to the host being managed by a central IT department and their policies. This means that others can view this directory. We can see the owner has Read/Write permissions over the file, and the staff group members have Read. All other groups and users have Read permissions as well.

Tip: To make it easier to remember when reading the attributes from left to right, remember the acronym `UGO`, which stands for User/Group/Others.

If we were to modify these permissions, we would notice that the attributes listed to the left would change to reflect the new permission set. For example, below, we can see a script with the execute attribute set for the User owner. Notice the difference?
File and Directory Permissions

kappajester83@htb[/htb]$ ls -l 

- rwx r-- r--@  1 htb-user staff 4663911 Aug 30  2019 ping-all-the-things.sh
d rwx r-x r-x@  1 htb-user staff 6512375 Aug 30  2019 nmap-output

The script's permissions allow only the User owner to execute the script, while the group members and others can only read its contents. Looking at the line for nmap-output, we can see that this is a directory because of the Filetype marked with d before our permissions. The execute attribute is also required to traverse into the directory and read the contents. Without it, a user would not be able to access the directory.

There is a bit more to file permissions than this, but for now, this will be an adequate understanding of how they work for this module. If you wish for a complete primer on Linux Permission management, check out the Permissions section in the Linux Fundamentals module.
GUI Permissions Management

Let's look at how these are viewed from the macOS GUI.

https://academy.hackthebox.com/storage/modules/157/gui-permissions-2.png

Viewing and Modifying Permissions

To get to the window seen above, we have to:

    select the file you wish to view
    right-click the file
    select get info

We may also use the Command + Option + I keyboard shortcut after selecting the file/folder to do the same thing.

This will bring up the screen we see in the example above. Notice the current permission set on the file. If we wish to modify it, we need to do a few things first:

    Click the lock in the bottom right corner (green square above) and authenticate. This will allow us to make changes to the file.
    From here, we must select a user or group from the name column and use the dropdown menu to its right to modify the permissions. We can see it in use below.

Change Permissions From GUI

Managing permissions from the GUI is pretty straightforward. We can click on any of the users shown under Sharing and Permission and select the appropriate permission from the drop-down menu, which will require us to enter our password to confirm the change. We may also click on the + icon to add a new user to this list or on the - icon to remove any of the shown users.

However, be careful how you set permissions on files and folders, as you could quickly expose data you may not wish for everyone to access.
Terminal Permissions Management

Next, let's take a bit to look at permissions from within the terminal. We will utilize the chmod and chown commands to manage file permissions and other attributes.
chmod

Let's take the following files as an example:
File and Directory Permissions

kappajester83@htb[/htb]$ ls -l  

total 8256
-rw-r--r--@ 1 htb-user  staff  2512910 Aug 30  2019 HTB-Wallpaper-1.png
-rw-r--r--@ 1 htb-user  staff  1710003 Aug 12  2019 HTB-Wallpaper-1920x1200.jpg

Let's try to change the permission attribute for everyone to read, write, and execute. In octal format, this will equal 777, which we can do as follows:
File and Directory Permissions

kappajester83@htb[/htb]$ chmod -vv 777 HTB-Wallpaper-1.png  

HTB-Wallpaper-1.png: 0100644 [-rwxr-xr-x ] -> 0100777 [-rwxrwxrwx ]

File and Directory Permissions

kappajester83@htb[/htb]$ ls -l  
  
-rwxrwxrwx@ 1 htb-user  staff  2512910 Aug 30  2019 HTB-Wallpaper-1.png  

We can see in the output that chmod -vv 777 <file> changed the old permissions from 644 to 777. The -vv switch was used to tell chmod to print out the old and new attributes in octal and symbolic notation.
chown

Using the same file from before, we will modify its ownership by replacing htb-user as the owner with htb-student. We can do so as follows:
File and Directory Permissions

kappajester83@htb[/htb]$ sudo chown htb-student HTB-Wallpaper-1.png

kappajester83@htb[/htb]$ ls -l 
-rwxrwxrwx@ 1 htb-student  staff  2512910 Aug 30  2019 HTB-Wallpaper-1.png

Notice the change from before? htb-student is now the file owner, and staff retained access to it as the group owner. chown is handy because we can also change the group ownership if we wish. To do so, we would specify ownership with chown like so:
File and Directory Permissions

kappajester83@htb[/htb]$ sudo chown htb-user:admins HTB-Wallpaper-1.png 

kappajester83@htb[/htb]$ ls -l 
-rwxrwxrwx@ 1 htb-user  admins  2512910 Aug 30  2019 HTB-Wallpaper-1.png  

Notice now that ownership of the file has changed again. htb-user is now the user owner, and admins is the group owner. These are just two different ways we can manage group ownership. However, there is also the chgrp command that deals specifically with groups.

Permissions are an essential aspect of any administrator's workload when it comes to ensuring systems are secure and that the integrity of a file is not compromised by someone without a need to access it. Maintaining confidentiality, integrity, and availability is a constant process.

Next, we are moving on to administering networking settings for our host.
Enable step-by-step solutions for all questions
sparkles-icon-decoration
Questions

Answer the question(s) below to complete this Section and earn cubes!
+ 2 If a file has a permission set of "rw-rw-rw-" applied, what would that equal in Octal format? (number only) 


