Knowledge Check

Let's put together everything we learned in this module and attack our first box without a guide.
Tips

Remember that enumeration is an iterative process. After performing our Nmap port scans, make sure to perform detailed enumeration against all open ports based on what is running on the discovered ports. Follow the same process as we did with Nibbles:

    Enumeration/Scanning with Nmap - perform a quick scan for open ports followed by a full port scan

    Web Footprinting - check any identified web ports for running web applications, and any hidden files/directories. Some useful tools for this phase include whatweb and Gobuster

    If you identify the website URL, you can add it to your '/etc/hosts' file with the IP you get in the question below to load it normally, though this is unnecessary.

    After identifying the technologies in use, use a tool such as Searchsploit to find public exploits or search on Google for manual exploitation techniques

    After gaining an initial foothold, use the Python3 pty trick to upgrade to a pseudo TTY

    Perform manual and automated enumeration of the file system, looking for misconfigurations, services with known vulnerabilities, and sensitive data in cleartext such as credentials

    Organize this data offline to determine the various ways to escalate privileges to root on this target

There are two ways to gain a foothold—one using Metasploit and one via a manual process. Challenge ourselves to work through and gain an understanding of both methods.

There are two ways to escalate privileges to root on the target after obtaining a foothold. Make use of helper scripts such as LinEnum and LinPEAS to assist you. Filter through the information searching for two well-known privilege escalation techniques.

Have fun, never stop learning, and do not forget to think outside of the box!

VPN Servers

Warning: Each time you "Switch", your connection keys are regenerated and you must re-download your VPN connection file.

All VM instances associated with the old VPN Server will be terminated when switching to a new VPN server.
Existing PwnBox instances will automatically switch to the new VPN server.


Questions

Answer the question(s) below to complete this Section and earn cubes!

Target(s): Click here to spawn the target system!

+ 1 Spawn the target, gain a foothold and submit the contents of the user.txt flag.

+10 Streak pts
+ 1 After obtaining a foothold on the target, escalate privileges to root and submit the contents of the root.txt flag.

